AQUIRING PROPERTY
Sniper paused the walk to his room when he noticed Scout pouring over piles of paper, scratching his hair under his hat.
 
"Whacha puzzlin' over, mate?" Sniper peered and began to read over Scout's shoulder.
 
"Ma's wanting to buy a new and cheaper house now that alla us kids are on our own. She's been tired with this whole shit and papah work so I 'cided to help her out."
 
"Well, I'll be damned, never took yeh for the lawyering time, or to be able to sit still long enough to go through all this paper and info."
 
Scout didn't look up from his papers when he answered. "Yeah, aftah Spy and I was stuck in that jail for the bank robbery I began read'n up on somma da law and shit. I don't want the lamp to be my lawyer again, lettalone Soldier." Scout subconsciously rubbed at his neck at the memory. "So I began to look more inta da laws and shit and since my brothahs aren't much of a help, Ma asked me if I could use what I've learned to look ova it and help out." Scout peaked up at Sniper. "'Specially since Imma be help'n pay for a lotta it."
 
To Do Sniper pulled up a chair and picked up some of the papers. It was heartwarming to know that Scout was using his merc-blood money for something so innocent. It was the least he could do to help the gremlin out, even if he knew nothing about American law, but if Soldier and Scout could pick up on it then surely he'd be able to.
 
"So, what have you figured out so far?" Sniper asked reading over the scrawled notes and colorful sticky notes covering the pages.
 
Scout straightened up and cracked his back, knuckles, and neck before fixing one arm on the table and leveling his eyes with Sniper. "Get ready forra rant, mate."
 
"'Kay, so right now Ma lives at a small house, but she lives alone now so she wants her own place to retire in.
 
"The basics is that she's gonna be purchas'n property. The process is like this: There's a contract that Ma's gotta get, so there a legal transfer of title and shit because I've read about Fraud laws and that's a I whole otha shit storm, so I'm mak'n sure this is legal as possible.
 
"So, Ma gets this contract, and she's got an executory period afta to legalize shit and make sure it's up to her standards, an' I'm makin sure it's best of tha best for Ma. So this time is crucial.
 
"So durin' the Executory period Ma's gonna give earnest money through an escrow agent or a neutral third party (usually a title company) and that acts as credit if the contract stays intact. So if Ma pays $5,000 then that's $5,000 off da price later. This is to show the seller that we're legit about this purchase and we wanna seriously look at their place, an' Ma won't lose this money unless there's a breach in contract (which I won't let happen).
 
"Ma can also get the termination option for her benefit, where she can get an unrestricted right to end the contract during option period after a certain amount of time (aftah the date of tha contract, and only lose tha option fee).
 
Sniper nodded, following along. "So is that money credited like the$5,000?"
 
Scout shook his head. "No, tha termination option money isn't always." He held up a sheet of paper where a note titled TERMINATION OPTION, in bright red ink and circled was NOT ALWAYS ACCREDITED. Scout placed the paper back on the table and shuffled a few around.
 
"Now, durin' this Executory period, Ma will get financing, inspection, and title. So she'll get money from tha bank, cause she won't let me pay tha whole thang, get people to make sure tha house isn't shit and is up to par, and then get tha formal right of ownership. That's the things that happen under tha exec period, for tha simple part." Scout gave a flourish of his hand.
 
Sniper was impressed. Shit, this kid had really done his homework. "So what happens after that?"
 
"Aftah that comes tha deed. Tha Deed is the final document. It ends the executory period an' it's a legal title transfer. It'll have tha grantor and grantee (Seller and Ma), property description, conveyance language (more legal mumbo jumbo), and signatures. It's what makes everythin' legit and worth it.
 
"Tha promises of tha contract that merge into tha deed are tha promises of title merge. Encumbrances an' fractional owndership issues post-closin' are a deed issue, notta title issue. Disclosure obligations don't merge, so like if there's ghosts and shit."
 
Sniper raised an eyebrow as he drank his beer. "Does that count as a disclosure notice?"
 
Scout crossed his arms. "No, but like it totally should! We've seen plenty-a ghosts and spooky shit and Ma legally should know about it." Scout ranted throwing his hands up in frustration.
 
Sniper rolled his eyes. "Continue, Esquire Scout."
 
"Well, tha's pretty much it for tha overview of purchasing property." Sniper raised his eyebrows in surprise. "Shit mate, you really seem to know what you're talking about."
 
Scout seemed caught off guard by the compliment but quickly recovered and sat up straight. "Uh yeah! I should! I've been studyin' property and shit. I feel like its hella applicable, especially since that's what us REDs are fightin' for. Some shitty gravel pile of property."
 
Sniper grinned. "I'll have to hear your new and enlightened views of our job and history now that you're so well educated." Sniper flicked off Scout's hat and ruffled his hair as he stood up. Scout shouted in protest and began to wiggle away. Sniper chucked as he walked over to grab them both a beer.
 
Sniper picked up the wall phone and dialed a number, while Scout ducked back into his piles of paper, figuring he bored Sniper to tears and was back to solo study. Sniper hung up the line and strolled back over to Scout with their beers. "I just ordered us some pizzas." Scout gratefully accepted the beer. "While we wait on it, I want'ta hear more 'bout this. Let's see how much yeh really know."
 
"I'm always up to a challenge." There was a spark in Scout's eyes and he held out his beer. They tapped the cans and began chugging to their toast.
 
"Le'z start with the Executory Period." Scout began organizing his papers together on the topic. Sniper grinned. This was a win-win: Scout had company, and Sniper got sit and listen to Scout excitedly share his new knowledge with him. Sniper didn't care about property law, but as Scout began to prattle on about Statute of Fraud, Sniper found himself eagerly paying attention.
 
CONTRACT OF SALE
 
"So, your mum found a place?" Sniper asked as they walked drove in Winnie.
 
Scout hummed in agreement as he set his feet up on the dash, much to Sniper's displeasure. "Yeah, Spy helped her finda place in Texas, so she'll be closah to us."
 
"Seems lika smart idea." Sniper noted as he pulled on the interstate and began following directions towards the new house.
 
"We're in tha middle of tha Executory Period. Ma's been talkin' with a guy who owns tha house. Spy is already down there helpin' Ma look into tha place and do inspections. I'm dealin' with paperwork." Scout slumped in his seat.
 
"Tell me what you've been doing?" Sniper asked to pass the time for their long drive.
 
Scout looked over at him. "You sure you wanna hear about my boring work?"
 
Sniper looked over the rim of his shades. "No mate, I was just bein' a prick."
 
"Don’t blame me if you begin to fall asleep on tha road." Scout quipped before launching into his spiel.
 
"First there's tha Statute of Frauds. I've been studyin' that like crazy cause I want this to be official. So there's allata requirements." Scout began ticking off fingers. "I made sure it's in writing, it identifies the buyer an' seller, promise of buyer to buy and seller to sell, physical property description, price, time for closin', and signatures of enforced parties, so Ma and this guy.
 
"'Cept see there are exceptions to Statute of Frauds that I learned all about, like Equitable Estoppel. Which is like there's an oral agreement admitted or clearly proved so no one can be a liar. Or when one party has the othah 'substantially change position in justifiable reliance on an oral contract'." Scout stated the last part in air quotes as he met eyes with Sniper. "AND," Scout emphasized. "Serious injury would result from refusing specific performance. An' all three must be met for Equitable Estoppel.
 
"But the real kicker is that I learn' all this and it don't even apply in Texas!" Scout cried in outrage. "So that was a lotta wasted and confused hours." He grumbled.
 
"At least you know for the future and outside of Texas."  Sniper countered.
 
Scout shrugged. "True, but Texas does have Part Performance. Thassa whole 'notha mess. Get this, for Part performance Ma's gotta take possession, pay alla or part of tha purchase price, AND either make improvements or have presence (that way she can show she was there like a giant SCOUT'S MA WAS HERE on tha property.)." Scout waved his hands in front like advertising a billboard. "That's tha main parts of Statute of Frauds. To disprove tha liars." Scout finished.
 
"Interesting." Sniper commented. "So do all states require all three parts of that partial performance rule?"
 
"Part Performance and no. Some states have Part Performance without all three parts." Scout noted.
 
Sniper nodded, beginning to understand. "So is that all you've been doin'?"
 
Scout gave a boisterous laugh. "If only!" Scout exclaimed. "Now we get into Marketable Title and Equitable Conversion." He sat up in preparation for this new topic.
 
"This is a game changer. The moment there is a valid contract for the property then it's like a postion switch. Ma has to have a good faith effort to obtain financin', get an inspection, get a title search and insurance, and notify the guy if there are any problems. Spy is helpin' her with that shit. That's just on Ma's side. This guy's gotta make the place available for Ma and Spy to inspect, give a disclosure, and fix any problems Ma says that are required."
 
Scout groaned. "Shit that reminds me I gotta talk ta Spy about the inspections and shit." Scout scrubbed his face with his hands before continuing.
 
"Remember the shit I said about a title?" He didn't even wait for Sniper to nod or reply. "Yeah so that shit comes into play here during that Executory Period. There's different types of titles. Ma has an equitable title and this guy has the legal title.  So there's Marketable Title, and tha's like the best one. It's like free from reasonable doubt like Spy would be satisfied with that. It's pretty much sayin' it's free from like every suspicious thing. Best part is, this title is implied in every contract! So Ma's already gett'n' top shelf titles lookin out for her. This shit's gotta be delivered by the time of closing too.
 
"Then there's unmarketable title. It's like Marketable title is RED and the unmarketable is BLU: they don't own shit. And that can be hassled by encumbrances which is like a right to the land like if RED or BLU were to have a gravel or oil lease for Tuefort or how people are given easements to it for travel and shit.
 
"There's also Zoning where it's not an encumbrance but more like standards to give rules. But if the covenant for encumbrance or zoning is violated then it's unmarketable. You best believe Spy measured and checked everythin' just in case. His OCD and prissiness is finally comin' in handy." Scout joked.
 
"This shit's important cause if it's unmarketable title then she can back out if the guy can't fix it or the liens and debt can't be paid. Spy's been good at checking for that shit.
 
"She's also gotta be careful cause in Texas they got this rule where if somethin' were to happen to the house lika tsunami or some weird shit like that then Ma's still gotta buy the place even if it's crumbles cause of the Uniform Vendor Purchaser Act."
 
"Why would there be a tsunami in Texas?" Sniper asked.
 
Scut shrugged. "I don' know, man. It's gotta be somethin' that's not caused by the seller."
 
"What about stuff that is caused by the seller?"
 
"Tha's a whole 'nothah situation." Scout pointed out. "So this is where the Duty to Disclose comes in. So Spy's preformin' all these pre-purchase investigations, cause that's what a reasonable buyer would do. There's certain stuff that this guy's gotta tell us; like, he's gotta tell the 'material latent defects'. Tha's pretty much like somethin' that would induce someone like Spy to think it's important shit to know and might change his mind; shit like electrical, lighting, foundation, plumbing, and shit like that.
 
"Oh yeah and shit like legal defects which is parta tha zoning, easements, and covenant like shit. Legal shit attached to the house. An' with that is also the Home Owners Association. That shit's gotta be disclosed cause it's like joining a cult for houses. You pay dues and have to follow certain house rules.
 
"I didn't tell ya this story, but the last place Ma looked at we got all tha way to the contract an' I realized tha family we were buying from didn't give us the Home Owner's Association shit and other stuff that's required like it's gotta be in writing and they hadda do this since it was a mandatory membership. Like that shit has to be disclosed before contract along restrictive covenants; dues; if the dues can change price; liens on tha property with foreclosure option; and all this has gotta be given before the contract. But this family didn't!" Scout seemed exasperated at the memory.
 
"So, Ma, Spy, and I talked, and I told 'em this. We decided to terminate the contract and leave cause tha's legal in this case cause they didn't disclose the shit properly before tha contract."
 
"Fascinating." Sniper gave a shit eating grin.
 
"It is!" Scout jumped to protest. "'Cause I realized that all the legal shit I've been learnin' is payin' off!"
 
"You should be proud of yerself." Sniper gave a softer and kinder smile. "I'm very impressed."
 
Scout looked taken aback at the compliment. He turned away from the open and kind eyes; he felt them piercing into him. He fought off the creeping blush and coughed. "Y-Yeah, thanks."
 
"Just bein' honest, mate." Sniper turned back to the road. Scout was silent for a couple beats, unsure of how to continue or fight off the fluttering in his stomach.
 
"Keep going with your disclosure story." Sniper urged.
 
"Aight." Scout agreed. "As I was sayin', we terminated that contract, and Ma began lookin' for 'nother place. This time Spy was weary of the disclosure rule so the guy that we're looking at now, in Texas. Ma called an' told me that Spy pretty much interrogated tha guy for all the disclosure information: Latent Material Defects and Legal Defects; even tha off-site conditions an' psychological stuff like if people have died on tha property and stuff. I mean not that it mattahs; cause once someone tried to rob Ma an' all my bros went ape shit on that guy an' we hadda call Spy who pretty much took cara it." Scout nodded at the memory. "Plus, Ma's got two Mercs, me an' Spy.
 
"We didn't even look at foreclosure homes, cause Ma found one that would be cheap an' shit but Spy an' I looked into it an' it's just not a good idea. Plus foreclosure sales don’t gotta disclose shit. Like disclosure doesn' happen for foreclosure sale shit, or between co-owners, or like new places, or "as is" places. We just decided to not even go with anythin' like that."
 
"Sounds like a mess ta deal with." Sniper commented.
 
"It is. Contracts are also a mess, like there's certain things you can get for breach of contracts too, so that helps. Termination, like what Ma did with that family, or there's compensation. There's different forms of remedies that I didn't even know about. I thought it was all money but there's money (equitable) relief, compensatory damages, special, an' punitive. Options are money, doin' shit to fix it, or file a suit. Ma just chose to end tha deal cause courts are expensive.
 
"Tha good thing about Ma buying this new house is that there's warranties, like if somethin' breaks and shit the guy's gotta fix it. So there's implied ones that resale homes don't have but new homes do. Those are if its livable and it's for latent defects only. Tha other is workmanship and that's for makin' sure the construction is upta par. Those can overlap like one a them two circle charts where the middle part is colored-"
 
"Venn Diagram." Sniper informed.
 
"Yeah that!" Scout agreed. "A Venn Diagram where habitability is ta make sure it's gonna stay sturdy cause of things like toxins or quicksand, and tha other is workmanship for tha builders to make sure they didn't build it outta shitty materials. Ya can't really waive them but workmanship can if it's expressly substituted for tha 'common law standards'.
 
"Think about it. This is all tha shit Ma has to deal with right now." Scout seemed exasperated at the thought. "An' just wait until she decides to buy tha house. Deed shit is annoyin' as fuck." Scout slumped back into his chair.
 
Sniper glanced over at the kid. "Why don' we pull in a grab a bite. Yeh can grab some a them snacks for the rest a the drive 'n yeh can rest if yeh want."  Sniper offered.
 
Scout gave him an honest grin. He adjusted his hat down to cover his eyes. "Wake me when you find a gas station or somethin'."
 
Sniper nodded. He'd keep driving for a while. Enjoy the silence and let Scout rest. This trip was nicer than Sniper expected it to be. The kid was smarter than Sniper expected him to be.
 
 
DEEDS
 
The trip had seemed to be going well. Scout's Ma was a very charming woman. Spy seemed to be ever the romantic, constantly with a hand around her waist or holding her hand. Not that Sniper was too surprised that Spy would act like this. Neither of them seemed to question Sniper's company with Scout, or why he had come with.
 
Scout had explained to him that the executory period was now up and it was time for the transfer of the deed.
 
"I'm guessing that mah newest lesson is 'bout deeds?" Sniper asked. Scout nodded as took a long sip of his bonk flavored slush.
 
Spy had insisted that Scout and Sniper take a walk around Boston and show Sniper around. Scout agreed, completely how both Spy and Scout's Ma were eagerly hoping for some alone time, and Scout had ignorantly blocked all of them, too happy to see his mother.
 
Sniper had yanked the gremlin by the collar and dragged him outside to begin walking around the neighborhood. Scout had prattled on and on about places he visited growing up until they decided to grab drinks from a station and wander around.
 
"What's mah first lesson, mate?" Sniper asked chewing a bite out of his jerky, the north wasn't as good as making jerky, but it wasn't half bad.
 
 
"Lez start with types of deeds." Scout pointed out. "There's three" He lifted three fingers off his slush cup while still maintaining a hold on it. "General Warranty, Special Warranty, an' Quitclaim Deed. 
 
"General Warranty Deeds are tha best. It's got covenants of title, warrants against defects in title (no matter who caused them), an' it's has tha most protection for Ma. Ma's bank prefers this typa deed too, cause all banks prefer this one.
 
"Special Warranty Deeds are only for defects by tha guy, but not othah people.
 
"Then there's tha Quitclaim Deed. That one would give whatever the guy had with tha property, but it doesn' mean that tha guy necessarily owns. That's mainly used for people tryin' ta take tha land by adverse possession, or foreclosure sales, or a gift." Scout informed.
 
"How can yeh tell which is which?" Sniper asked.
 
"Quitclaims will said somethin' like 'grantor quitclaims to grantee for all of grantor's right, title, and interest'." Scout quoted in an cringe worthy British accent. "Tha Special is like 'by through or under Grantor but not otherwise'. General Warranty says 'grants and conveys', so their pretty different in tha language." Scout pointed out.
 
"An' each of these has its own covenants; except Quitclaim; Quitclaim has no covenants." Scout shrugged. "Special is Covenant of Special Warranty and General Warranty is Covenant of General Warranty."
 
Sniper gave a low impressed whistle. "Wow, I nevah woulda guessed."
 
Scout socked him in the shoulder and continued explaining. "There's special covenants too."
 
"Aside from those difficult ones yeh just told me?" Sniper quipped with a toothy grin.
 
"Imma beat you bad that not even the respawn can help you." Sniper chuckled before allowing Scout to continue.
 
"There's six othah types of express covenants: Covenant of Seisin which is a present covenant sayin' tha guy actually owns the house. Right to Convey is pretty much what it sounds like." Scout stated trying to prevent another one of Sniper's sassy comments. "That's a present too; same with Covenant Against Encumbrances. That one pretty much makes sure there ain't any liens, or easements, covenants, or mortgages.
 
"The next are all future covenants. So, General Warranty is pretty much to protect against anyone claiming their title is better. Quiet Enjoyment is to ensure your possession won't be disturbed. Finally, there's Covenant of Further Assurances say this guy will do anythin' and make any othah document to make sure the title is perfect.
 
"Then there's Implied ones. But no covenants are implied by common law."
 
"What does that mean?" Sniper asked.
 
"It means that they only exist cause laws allow it to exist." Scout clarified. "General Warranty has two: that the gyy hasn't given tha place to anyone else (No Prior Conveyances) an' that it's free from encumbrances (Against Encumbrances). But No Prior Conveyances is Texas created but it's not the same as Seisin.
 
"Also, title covenants are contracts, so if there is an injury at the time an' it's matched up to a specific promise then you've gotta breach.
 
"Third, they're specific promises to tha quality of tha title, but not tha land."
 
Sniper hummed and took a sip of his bottle of water. "Lemme see if I got this. Seisin: I own what I'm giving yeh. Right to Convey: I have the right to give it to yeh. Against Encumbrances: I haven' given it to any'un else."
 
"And they're all present." Scout added. 
 
Sniper repeated and continued. "The future uns are those quiet enjoyment uns: I will protect yeh against other claims. 'n Further Assurances: Imma do what I can ta make it perfect." 
 
The beaming smile Scout gave to him made it all worth it. Scout literally bounced when he gave a cheer of agreement. "So there's a 4 year statute of limitations to file your issue in Texas. Present ones are at the time it's given an' future ones are when tha eviction happens."
 
"So who yeh sue?" Sniper asked.
 
"For present ones you sue  the immediate grantor in a majority of tha states and in Texas, in the minority you sue all grantors within the statute of limitations. Tha future ones you sue tha ones who made tha defect. So when tha evictions happens you can sue."
 
"So what's an eviction?"
 
"Claimin' superior title and yeieldin' to it." Scout answered simply. "But there's certain rules the evictions. First, if you know there's someone wifa better title that ain't good enough for a breach. Two, voluntary yielding doesn't count. Then there's tha option that if there is one then Ma should wait until tha superior title dispossession her. Tha fourth is that tha othah title doesn't matter until they try to claim it does. Then, there's tha fifth rule that if a court says the title is adverse to Ma then that's a constructive eviction." 
 
"Bloody hell, how many rules are there?" Sniper groaned.
 
"There's three more." Scout stated honestly. "There's the one where when a title is actually and hostilely asserted then that's an eviction." Scout ticked a finger. "The one where someone claims possession that breaks quiet enjoyment therefore. Finally," Scout emphasized. "the one where a foreclosure of somethin' like a lien or mortgage can sue for breach.
 
"Oh, an' encumbrances with those there's a problem at transfer but it doesn't start until there's an impendin' foreclosure or somethin'. There's three things about that too." Scout chunked his empty drink in the trash. "Injunction to maintain status quo; quiet title action; an' break of covenant versus encumbrances." Scout brushed his hands across his pants. "Breach for that would cost tha price to get rid of them."  Scout scratched at his growing scruff off handedly as he began to think back to his notes.
 
"Damages get measured differently. Majority like Texas says purchase price plus interest. Minority in the east coast, like Massachusetts, say value of the land plus improvements or depletion. An' the purchase price of the property can be recovered by Ma but tha guy is only liable in act'l damage for tha price he received.
 
"There are othah rules for recovering damages. Like if Ma wasn't in possession then she could get tha amounta interest an' taxes paid. But if she was in possession then she can only get tha amount in excess of fair rental value durin' tha possession, or tha interest and taxes paid.
 
"Tha guy wouldn't have a duty to mitigate damages. An' knowledge of encumbrances doesn't prevent tha claim but it can change tha impact of tha award of damages.
 
"Improvements of tha property are all about good faith an' shit for Texas and tha majority, so like they gotta be made in good faith, an' that's recoverable. So Ma doesn't know she didn't own the land and she 'cided to build a huge ass garden."
 
"A garden be nice." Sniper chimed in.
 
"Yeah, but it'd be a bitch to deal with with lawyers." Scout mumbled. "There's also a shit ton of fuckin' rules about attorney's fees. Like in Texas an' tha majority say that tha loser pays, but tha minority says that Ma could recover if she lost only if she gave the guy notice of tha suit and demands that he defend her. Tha's what would happen in Tuefort in NM.
 
"I haven't even begun to talk about deed delivery. So that statute of conveyance that I mentioned says it's gotta be in writing, ID Ma an' tha guy, got words a conveyance, physical description of tha property, and got tha guy's signature. Plus," Scout emphasized. "It's gotta have tha proper execution, delivery, an' acceptance.
 
Sniper led them over to a bench to sit on while he fished out some sunflower seeds to munch on while he listened. "What's all that about?" He popped some seeds into his mouth.
 
"Tha execution has gotta have a valid signature, so the guy's gotta sign it, give permission to mah or give someone else permission to sign for him. But Spy's makin' sure the guy's gonna sign himself. So there's no chance-a forgery or fraud. Tha's why we're bein' so paranoid about this shit. Cause fraud or forgery can ruin it all.
 
"Delivery's gotta be good too, so it's gotta be by words or actions to sow tha intent to be immediately effected to transfer. That way if there's any evidentiary issues then tha deliver is a fact question, but worst case scenario the guy would say he didn't mean ta give it to ma, but when she records it that'll be her argument against him that he did mean ta.
 
"Also, if tha guy gives a condition for delivery we ain't doin' that shit. Cause in Texas and most states they say that the attempt then that a no go and tha FSA is given to Ma. Minority states say they ain't doin' that shit either but the titles stays with tha guy. Overall, it ain't a good thing ta deal with. Even with third parties, cause tha guy would have to show intent to convey now and it wouldn't be revocable.
 
"Last off, Ma's gotta properly accept." Scout sounded out of breath. "It's presumed that she'll accept a beneficial conveyance, and she can disclaim a conveyance but it's gotta be in a reasonable time, and if she doesn't accept then it's all for shit and void. I ain't dealin' with that shit, so I'm makin' sure this is all valid an' legit an' nothin' is gonna disturb her."
 
Scout slumped exhausted on the park bench. Sniper shook the bag of seeds. "I think yeh need a break from all this lawyering." He handed offered some seeds to Scout. "Eat and forget."
 
Scout smiled up at him. "Man, Snipes, I'm tellin' ya, you always know how ta make me feel bettah." He popped a handful of seeds into his mouth. Unaware of Sniper's blush and smile as the older man turned away. Sniper nodded and stuffed his face with more seeds, unsure of how to responds. 
 
 
 BASIC REAL ESTATE FINANCE
 
"Alright Ma, since you won't let me or Spy help you pay then we gotta talk about Finance."
 
Scout's Ma nodded as she nursed her cup of coffee, no, not just coffee, it was some of that fancy milk and coffee that she had made from the European machine that was obviously Spy's idea. Sniper would have been happy with some simple black coffee but his mum had taught him better than to refuse an offer from a host. So he kindly accepted and listened as Scout talked with Spy and his mother about finances. Sniper had it easy, he just decided to sit with them and listen. He was only here for the gremlin and to help him. Not saying that Scout's mum wasn't a dear, she was, but Sniper began to realize more and more that he was falling hard for the kid. Now look at him: a proper sap for sitting while the kid helped his mum with law and talked about finances. 
 
There was a pang of sorrow as he wished he could call his own parents to talk to them about this sudden discovery. Maybe he could talk to Soldier's friend Merasmus if he knew a way he could talk to his parents.
 
The kid was obviously frustrated that she wasn't letting him and Spy pay for the whole thing. Sniper understood where Scout was coming from, but more so he agreed with his mum. It was a pride thing.
 
"Ok, Ma Imma speak to you as your lawyer. You should let us pay for it." The woman's face morphed into a terrifying glare that made all son's within a mile's radius feel guilty. "B-But as your son who his your lawyer, we gonna talk finances." Scout amended.
 
"Thanks, my little roadrunner." She grinned like nothing had happened. This woman was scary, and she had to be for raising Scout and seven other boys, Sniper realized.
 
"So, lendahs are lookin' for this guy-"
 
"Al." She corrected.
 
"-lookin' for Al to have equity, there to be no other liens (so they can be first in time), and for an' easy, quick, and inexpensive foreclosure in case anythin' goes wrong." She nodded and sipped her drink.
 
"There are certain financing documents too. There's tha Promissory Notes, which is ya promise ta repay tha debt, and it's got all that info about repayin', an' personal liability just in case.
 
"Then there's tha deed of trust, or mortgage. It's ta make tha property collateral, an' allows it ta be sold in case it happens, but it give guidance to tha foreclosure process too. The deed of trust has got Al, you, and that trustee, it don't got a judicial foreclosure process, and tha trustee will sell tha collateral.
 
"Tha mortgage is between you and Al. It's gotta judicial foreclosing process, and tha sheriff will be tha one to sell it."
 
"What's the difference between a judicial and non-judicial foreclosure?" Ma asked.
 
"Ok, so they both go like this: you default on payments, then you get a notice of default an' time ta cure, then if ya don't then tha debt is accelerated. This is where they get different. So with tha non you get a notice of sale, then tha sale happens on tha courthouse steps for a trustee's deed, then if it's not all paid off then tha bank can come for a deficiency judgement in court.
 
"Tha judicial one after the debt is accelerate then you're served with a foreclosure suit, the there's a judgement on the debt and a court ordahed sale, then it's tha notice of sale, tha sale happens and tha constable gives a quitclaim deed, then tha court makes tha sale official and tha deed is final, and then if tha debt isn't satisfied then tha bank has judgement for personal obligation."
 
"That doesn' sound good." She commented. "Why would people do those?"
 
"No it ain't, an' it's cause people want their money. Like with tha non, it's faster, cheaper, an' that trustee's deed's got a covenant of general warranty an' tha court don't got oversight. An' that judicial one if that debt is more than tha property then they can get a deficiency judgement, and something' that judicial foreclosure is tha only thing available, plus you'd be more aware with tha suit of tha events."
 
His Ma hummed. "Well, I can understand that."
 
"So there's tha legal shhhhhh-stuff!" Scout caught himself. Sniper was trying not to laugh as his mum glared cautiously at him. Spy for the most part was ignoring everything but the important stuff. "So once a valid mortgage or deed of trust is obtained then tha bank will have a non-possessory interest on tha house. Tha house will be specific collateral. Cause tha deed of trust or mortgage is not only purchase money but it's security for tha bank.
 
"So what's tha foreclosure process?" She inquired.
 
"It's when ya default by Al, tha mortgagor. It's caused by default, and tha default can include: not payin' tha debt, property taxes, maintainin' insurance, maintainin' property, or failure to comply with restrictive covenants." Scout read off his list of notes.
 
"But ya get time ta fix it. So ya get notice of default and you get at least 20 days to cure tha debt. An' it's gotta be sent by certified mail to your last address, but ya don't actually gotta receive it; is tha tricky thing. Then if ya don't do it and we go through eithah tha non or judicial foreclosure process then your given notice of tha sale 21 days before the date of the sale. Tha's tha nicer one cause tha sale's gotta have written notice posted at courthouse door, written notice filed in the office, written notice senty by certified mail, an' it'll be posted on tha website of tha clerk's office. An' in Texas tha foreclosure sales always gotta be on tha first Tuesday of the month between 10 an' 4 and it's at tha courthouse, an it's gotta occur within a three hour window of when you get told it would happen."
 
"Well that's nice of them." She patted Spy's hand that held hers and smiled at both of her boys.
 
Scout shrugged. "Yeah, I guess, it's clockwork like that. But if it happens correctly then then that sale title goes from Al to tha highest bidder, and it'll get rid of all junior liens but not senior liens. So that's why tha bank wants ta be first so it's tha oldest lien.
 
"But ya get more protection under the Equity Protection dependin' on how many payment's you’ve made and how much has been paid." Scout's Ma smiled and nodded encouragingly at her son. "So if you've paid less than 40% AND less than 48 months of payment then ya get no protection and Al can enforce tha remedy of rescission, or enforece that remedy of acceleration and forfeiture, but only if he give notes of intent to do that and gives ya 30 days to fix tha default."
 
"What happens if I'm more than 40% or 48 months?" She proposed.
 
Scout smiled. "Then if ya either have 40% paid or tha equivalent of 48 months paid then Al can get a trustee to sell your interest in tha house, but he can't enfore those remedies of rescission or forfeiture and acceleration, and you get 60 days to fix it."
 
Spy nodded and squeezed his loves hands and kissed her cheek. "Do not fret, mon coeur, if anything happens I will be happy to give you all the money in the world."
 
She smiled back at him and nuzzled his nose with her. "Merci."
 
Scout felt like gagging. "Alright, how about we take a break real quick." Neither noticed as they made gross cooing sounds.
 
Sniper stood up and clasped Scout on the shoulder. "Let's give them a minute." He advised guiding the younger man away from the other two.
 
PRIORITIES AND RECORDING
 
Sniper was actually invested in this property shit now. He was wondering how this was all going to work out. Maybe Scout had a greater hold on him than he realized, or maybe he felt like this was one of those choose your own adventure books he used to read as a kid. Either way he was more interested to learn what happened, but still was more interested in spending time with Scout. Bloody hell, he had it bad. Sniper took a long pull from his beer.
 
"Yer mum decided to buy the house. Now what's left to do?" Sniper asked.
 
They were back in Tuefort, since it was all said and done for the most part. Spy decided to stay back to help tie up any loose ends, among other things Sniper suspected. Sniper was glad to be back in the seedy bar in Tuefort with the rest of the team, even if he was spending most of his time with Scout still.
 
"Now, she's gotta make sure she records it properly. Spy's gonna help her with that. Cause if she don't then it could all go fallin' down like one-a them jenga towers. Scout chugged the rest of his pint before continuing. "So the rule is 'first in time, first in right' an' tha's pretty much like whoever records first wins."
 
"Sounds simple enough." Sniper said off handedly.
 
"'Cept it not!" Scout complained slamming his empty glass on the counter for dramatic effect. "There's ways that someone else can win. Like it's kinda fair but it's really annoyin'. People with equitable interest who record first could lose against a BFP."
 
"What's equitable interests?"
 
Scout ticked his fingers. "purchasers on a contract; beneficiaries of a trust; people holdin' tha benefit of a restrictive covenant; mortgagees (in Texas an' tha majority of states); rights from an estoppel; an' possible holders of an implied easement."
 
"'n BFP?" Sniper raised an eyebrow.
 
"Yeah, a bona fide purchaser. So there's a bona fide purchaser and a good faith creditor. They're both in good faith with no actual inquiry or constructive notice at tha time of the subsequent interest, an' they're not a donee."
 
"So what's the difference?"
 
"Bona fide purchaser has good and valuable consideration an' like a bargained for exchange while a good faith creditor had some value given but also a pre-existing debt or a judgement creditor. So it's like givin' a pie to a stranger  who asked for some versus given pie to a stranger but ya got some kinda insight into what pie they like."
 
"I think I follow." Sniper nodded.
 
"Yeah, it's tha innocence that makes tha difference. Ya gotta protect tha innocent ones who gave it away for good will reasons (vender's lien, DOT, mortgage), rather than tha others who gave it after they had some help (credit card; personal loan; lawsuit)."
 
"So what's good faith?"
 
"That's like Engie, you'd have reason ta believe that he's done all his work and isn't gonna jip ya. He's a good guy. If it's forgery then it's not good faith, and also Quitclaim deeds ain't good faith either."
 
"Why not?"
 
"Cause tha minority and Texas say so; they think it ain't innocent. Tha majority that that that Quitclaim person has gotta inquiry notice and has gotta do a reasonable investigation. You gotta make sure no one else has got tha puzzle pieces in ya box. If ya get it from someone else tha minority says it's your fault for not getting it from a store, but tha majority says if ya count all tha pieces and not some of them before ya try then you're good."
 
"That's a good explanation." Sniper complimented raising his glass.
 
Scout gave a breathless smile at that and exclaimed his thanks, before turning bright red and fumbling over his next words. Even with some booze in him the kid could remember all that law stuff, Sniper hid his own grin behind the lip of his glass.
 
"So how do yeh check for all yeh puzzle pieces?"
 
"Cash; labor; other valuable property; loan money for a lien; negotiable instrument for a promise ta pay; checks and stuff like that. Ya don't get it for gifts, inheritance stuff, antecedent debt or judgement; or like if it was given with love and cheesy stuff like that. Hard work and money over emotions." Scout shrugged. "You can also compare purchase price with fair market value and that'll give you a gray scale of when it's sufficient. An' with notice it's like: actual, constructive record, and inquiry, so did you know, did the records say, or you could you have found out."
 
"What if yeh couldn't have known, but they say yeh should have?" Sniper interrupted.
 
"Then you gotta prove that there's no way, like even if ya looked then ya couldn't have known." Scout breezily responded.
 
"That's annoying." Sniper mumbled.
 
"Yeah but not as annoying as if there's people arguin' between a recorded and a BFP. There's certain notice issues for tha BFP; tha forms of notice have gotta be acutal, constructive, an gotta have that inquiry notice too for a reasonable search. There's three different ways title disputes can be resolved based on tha state you're in. So in LA and NC it's Race Statue; it's like just who ever records first wins. Halfa tha othah states like CA and GA have Race-Notice where you gotta record fist an' have good faith. Tha othah halves like TX and MA say it's whoevah the BFP is gets it no matter what, doesn't matter tha recording requirement; that's tha Notice statute."
 
"So what's gotta be recorded?"
 
"Fuckin' everythin'. Deeds, deeds of trust, mortgages, express easement agreements, restrictive covenants, leases for longer than a year; contracts for deeds; abstract judgements; and liens (like home equity, mechanics, extension of a mortgage, or deed of trust).
 
"It makes it easier to search when it's recorded too, so you can make sure no one's tryin' ta rip ya off on tha property. For tha title search you statr with the grantee index an' go backwards, an' go forward through tha index for each grantor. Tha records provide constructive record notice. It's gotta meet certain requirements an' be properly acknowledged cause it changes tha title an' possession of tha property."
 
"What if there's a problem with recording?"
 
"Then if someone looks for it it's there but there's no constructive notice. An' if it's indexed wrong then there is constructive notice cause there's nothin' you coulda done about that. Alla this is ta show that you actually own tha land so no one can try to take it from you."
 
Both men were caught off guard when Soldier burst out of nowhere and exclaimed. "I heard'ja talkin' about property. Did I ever tell you about how I got my own land?"
 
"I'm assumin' ya bought it." Engineer walked up.
 
"Nope! I took it from some communist." Soldier declared.
 
"Wait, what?!" Scout fumbled.
 
"Yep!" I took that land as mine and declared it in the name of America!" Soldier gave a salute.
 
"Okay, this I gotta hear." Sniper stated, turning towards Soldier.
 
 
ADVERSE POSSESSION
 
"This is how my family has gains our land and how I got my home too." Soldier began. "Adverse Possession is the name of the game, maggots."
 
"Oh god, no." Scout groaned into his hands. Sniper spared him a look and knew they were about to hear one hell of a story.
 
"For those of you who don't know, Adverse Possession is when you take the land from the enemy, like a territory war. It's both defensive and offensive, for the benefit of the land and title! Defense for stale claims and offense for the adverse possessor to be able to get his land."
 
"Now my family has mastered this. You can't take government land, unless a law allows, some states allow it against the government for time longer than statute o' limitations, and some have it against lands held in  a proprietary capacity."
 
Sniper looked over to Scout for confirmation. "Well he ain't wrong." Scout declared.
 
Soldier continued with a nod. "Adverse possession must be actual, adverse or hostile, open and notorious, exclusive, continuous, and all during the statutory period." Soldier held up five fingers for the six requirements.
 
"Uh Soldier you've only got five fingers up." Scout pointed out.
 
"Exactly! The sixth is with all of them." He bellowed. "Each of these are different. Actual: means it actually happens even with 'color o' title' (claiming based on a defective and worthless deed). Adverse or hostile: without permission from the weakling you're getting your land from or else it doesn't count. You must have the intention to take the land regardless of who owns it."
 
"That's in Texas. A majority of states says your state of mind is irrelevant as long as you're usin' land that's not yours, an' you're doin' it without permission." Scout added.
 
"Right!" Soldier approved. "Open and notorious: it must show that you are taking this land. None of the cowards way of hiding it. Exclusive: you can't share with anyone else. Continuous: you never stop and never give in. You keep going until you own what's yours."
 
"Or not yours." Scout quipped. Scout barely missed Soldier 's punch, if it weren't for Sniper pulling him back off the chair and right beside him. God, they were so close together, but neither of them tried to move away. Sniper counted that as a win.
 
"My pop took a piece of land and when he died he passed privity to my me."
 
"So, how long does it take to get the land?" Engineer asked.
 
"3, 5, 10, and 25 years." Soldier grinned under his helmet.
 
"How does that work?" Sniper asked.
 
"Different times for different types." Soldier pointed out.
 
"3 years: you have a 'color o' title'; you display the general requirements for three years, starting no earlier than three years after the day the cause of action occurs. The 'color o' title' must not be void on the face, not be void because of delivery, acceptance, or forgery (ab initio), not be a result of intrinsic fraud or unfairness (so my great grandpop couldn't threaten the sucker into getting the land), must be capable of being recorded, and be able to be traced back to the sovereign." He wiped a tear from under his helmet. "That land in the north and that statute is what started and made my family aware of adverse possession. My great grandpop got a bad deed, but didn't find out for four years later, so he gained adverse possession. Which intrigued my family to look further into gaining adverse possession for all of our lands.
 
"My great uncle used this to get the next patch of land. He found out he had a duly registered deed, enjoyed the property, paid the taxes, and had the general requirements. Someone tried to claim that there was a problem with the ab initio part so it was void. Fortunately, his deed had a description of the property, wasn't void on its face, no forgery, it was recorded, and it wasn't a quitclaim deed, so after 7 years of living on that land it was still his.
 
 
"My grandpa took a piece of land for 10 years because he and my dad stayed on the land with the general rules and they farmed on the land. The people tried to get their friends to check the land, but they didn't, so we got the land. 160 acres cause that's what we were allowed to claim without a title."
 
"I can't believe he knows all that. This man couldn't defend us in court but he knows everythin' about adverse possession." Scout turned away and began beating his head against the bar counter while Soldier continued to tell how he and his family would improve the land. Legally correct.
 
Scout threw his hands in the air. "I'm done! I can't take this Twilight Zone shit!" He stormed away to find the bar tender. Sniper would follow him later. He was pretty interested in Soldier's stories.
 
 
GIFTS
 
Sniper and Scout were shooting bottles off of the random places Scout had hidden them when Engineer had come up to them.
 
"Hey Scout, I was wondering if you could help me with something." He was holding some papers.
 
Scout sat up and turned towards the other man. "Ya whaddup?"
 
"See, I got a sister back in Texas and I was hoping to give her some property. I want to make it official, so I figured I'd find you."
 
Scout grinned at the compliment. "Tell me what ya wanna do, buddy!"
 
"I want to give her and her new fiancé my old farm, and I want to give them grams and gramps rings." He handed over the deed and pictures of the property as well as the two rings.
 
"Well, that's just the sweetest thang." Sniper whistled.
 
Engineer scratched the back of his neck. "The man had the courage to come all the way here and was prepared to fight me for her hand, even though he's bout scrawnier than y'all." Engineer smiled. "My little sister is a genius bioinformatics engineer and she met the dorkiest lookin' computer scientist. The guy ain't doin' her wrong and I want to help them out and show them my support."
 
Scout was pouring over the papers he was handed while the other two talked. "It'll be a real easy thing." Scout looked up at Engineer. "So for tha rings, you just gotta give it to them and say 'I give you these rings' or somethin' to show that you're doing it for tha present. It don't require writing. Make sure it's in person an' you state presently." Engineer nodded. "For tha farm, that's different, an' ya wanna make sure you do this right so she ain't gonna have any problems later on."
 
"And what's that, son?" Engineer leaned in.
 
"There's three types of delivery: manual: like what you're doing with the rings; constructive:  where it gives a way to access tha gift, like a key; then there's symbolic, like with the deed or writing sayin' it. Tha farm's allowed to be constructive or symbolic cause you can't physically hand it over, impossible or impractical stuff.
 
"These are called inter vivos gifts cause you're alive when you're doin' it. But let's say you were dyin' on tha field and decided to give me the rings cause you knew you were gonna die soon, it be a causa mortis gift: then it's really gotta be a manual delivery an' you can't give over your farm when you're dyin'. But if Medic then ended up savin' ya then you would take back tha rings.
 
"But when you give it to them, give them tha actual rings and the deed, plus give them writing that makes it clear an' convincin' of your intent to give it presently." He handed back the papers. "If you need help writin' tha deed, I gotcha."
 
Engineer gave a wide smile. "Thanks, son." He patted Scout on the shoulder and waved to both men before leaving.
 
 
 
VIOLA,
 
Madeleine Traeger